posts/rebuilding-alpaca-huggingface-trainer.mdx, before:

---
title: Rebuilding Alpaca with the Hugging Face Trainer Class
description: Fine-tuning Llama-2-7B using the Alpaca dataset and Hugging Face Trainer
date: "2023-11-07"
---

## Table of Contents

## Introduction

In March of this year (2023), a lab at Stanford released a small project that quickly became massively influential — [Alpaca](https://crfm.stanford.edu/2023/03/13/alpaca.html). The authors used `text-davinci-003` (an InstructGPT model from OpenAI) to generate a dataset with 52K examples of prompts and responses, then fine-tuned Llama-7B using those prompt and response pairs.

The result was surprisingly good — Alpaca was able to interact with users similarly to OpenAI's InstructGPT models, despite being inexpensive to train and not using a human-created training dataset. In this blog post, we'll write code to train our own model from scratch using the Alpaca dataset.

_The code in this blog post is based on that in the [Alpaca repo](https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca), though my hope is that it should be simpler and more intuitive. All credit should go to the original authors of the paper._

## Setup

You'll need to install `torch`, `transformers`, `datasets`, and `accelerate`. `wandb` is great if you want to track training loss over time. And, of course, you'll need some good GPUs if you want your model to train quickly.

Start out by creating one main folder, `alpaca-repro`, with two subfolders: one called `trainer`, where your training code will go, and one called `finetunes`, where we'll save your fine-tuned model.

## Step 1: Loading and Processing the Data

Put all of the code in this section into `trainer/get_data.py`.

We'll begin by loading the [Alpaca data](https://huggingface.co/datasets/tatsu-lab/alpaca) from the Hugging Face hub. Each question/prompt pair in the dataset needs to be converted into a single string that we can train the model on, but we actually generate one extra string: `source`, which we use further down to ignore labels so our model doesn't train on instructions.

```python
from datasets import load_dataset

original_dataset = load_dataset("tatsu-lab/alpaca")["train"]

template_no_context = """Below is an instruction that describes a task. \
Write a response that appropriately completes the request.

### Instruction:
{instruction}

### Response:
"""

template_context = """Below is an instruction that describes a task. \
Write a response that appropriately completes the request.

### Instruction:
{instruction}

### Input:
{input}

### Response:
"""

def data_to_string(data):

    instruction = data["instruction"]
    context = data["input"]
    response = data["output"]

    template = template_context if len(context) > 0 else template_no_context
    source = template.format(instruction=instruction, input=context)

    return {
        "source": source,
        "text": source + response,
    }


dataset = original_dataset.map(
    data_to_string
).remove_columns(['instruction', 'input', 'output'])
```

Here we split the data so we can use 10% for evaluation and tests later on.

```python
processed_dataset = dataset.train_test_split(test_size=0.1)

train_dataset = processed_dataset["train"]
eval_dataset = processed_dataset["test"]
```

Finally, we define a data collator to be used by our training loop. Remember that each `text` string is just made up of the `source` plus the response. So we tokenize the `source` string to figure out how many labels in the `text` string to ignore.

```python
IGNORE_TOKEN = -100

def data_collator(features, tokenizer):
    sources = [feature["source"] for feature in features]
    targets = [feature["text"] for feature in features]

    source_tokens = tokenizer(
        sources,
        return_tensors="pt",
        padding='longest',
        max_length=None,
    )

    target_tokens = tokenizer(
        targets,
        return_tensors="pt",
        padding='longest',
        max_length=None,
    )

    labels = target_tokens["input_ids"].clone()

    for i in range(len(labels)):
        source_len = source_tokens["attention_mask"][i].sum()

        labels[i, :source_len] = IGNORE_TOKEN

    res = {
        "input_ids": target_tokens["input_ids"],
        "attention_mask": target_tokens["attention_mask"],
        "labels": labels,
    }

    return res
```

## Step 2: Writing our Training Loop

Put all of the code in this section into `trainer/loop.py`.

This code is fairly self-explanatory, so I've just annotated it with comments.

```python
from transformers import LlamaForCausalLM, LlamaTokenizer, Trainer, TrainingArguments
from accelerate import Accelerator
from get_data import train_dataset, eval_dataset, data_collator

accelerator = Accelerator()

MODEL_PATH = "meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-hf" # path to Llama on Hugging Face Hub
OUTPUT_DIR = "../finetunes/alpaca-7b" # where to save the fine-tuned model

tokenizer = LlamaTokenizer.from_pretrained(MODEL_PATH, legacy=False)
tokenizer.pad_token = tokenizer.eos_token
tokenizer.padding_side = "right" # not set by default, strangely

model = LlamaForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    MODEL_PATH, device_map="auto"
)

training_args = TrainingArguments(
    output_dir='checkpoints', # where Trainer will save model checkpoints
    num_train_epochs=1, # start with a low number of epochs for testing
    learning_rate=2e-5,
    logging_steps=10,
    per_device_train_batch_size=8,
    remove_unused_columns=False,
    save_steps=1000,
    save_total_limit=1,
    report_to="wandb",
)

trainer = Trainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    train_dataset=train_dataset,
    eval_dataset=eval_dataset,
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
    data_collator=lambda x: data_collator(x, tokenizer),
)

trainer.train()
trainer.evaluate()

model.save_pretrained(OUTPUT_DIR)
tokenizer.save_pretrained(OUTPUT_DIR)
```

## Step 3: Running our Training Loop

Create `trainer/accelerate_config.yaml`, and paste in the following configuration:

```yaml
compute_environment: LOCAL_MACHINE
deepspeed_config: {}
distributed_type: "NO"
downcast_bf16: "no"
machine_rank: 0
main_process_ip: null
main_process_port: null
main_training_function: main
mixed_precision: "no"
num_machines: 1
num_processes: 1
use_cpu: false
```

Then `cd` into `./trainer` and run:

```bash
accelerate launch --config_file accelerate_config.yaml loop.py
```

Saving the model and weights might take a while, so be patient!

## Step 4: Testing our Fine-Tuned Model!

I wrote a simple script to load up our fine-tuned model and interact with it! It doesn't support conversations with context, but it's a great way to see how the model is working.

Create a new file called `alpaca-repro/model_test.py`, then run `python3 model_test.py`.

```python
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM, pipeline

template = """Below is an instruction that describes a task. \
Write a response that appropriately completes the request.

### Instruction:
{instruction}

### Response:
"""

model_path = "./finetunes/alpaca-7b"

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_path, legacy=False)
tokenizer.pad_token = tokenizer.eos_token
tokenizer.padding_side = "right"

model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    model_path, device_map="auto", local_files_only=True
)

pipe = pipeline(
    "text-generation",
    model=model,
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
    return_full_text=False,
    do_sample=True,
    temperature=0.9,
    max_new_tokens=200,
)

def prompt_model():
    prompt = input("Enter your question: ")
    prompt = template.format(instruction=prompt)
    answer = pipe(prompt)
    print(answer[0]["generated_text"])

while True:
    prompt_model()
```

## Conclusion

I hope this article was helpful and informative! My plan is to follow it up in a few days with an explanation of how to use FSDP with the Hugging Face Trainer.

_If you liked this article, don't forget to share it and follow me at [@nebrelbug](https://twitter.com/nebrelbug) on Twitter._

Commit message:

feat: add Gist to FSDP article

posts/rebuilding-alpaca-huggingface-trainer.mdx, after:

---
title: Rebuilding Alpaca with the Hugging Face Trainer Class
description: Fine-tuning Llama-2-7B using the Alpaca dataset and Hugging Face Trainer
date: "2023-11-07"
---

## Table of Contents

## Introduction

In March of this year (2023), a lab at Stanford released a small project that quickly became massively influential — [Alpaca](https://crfm.stanford.edu/2023/03/13/alpaca.html). The authors used `text-davinci-003` (an InstructGPT model from OpenAI) to generate a dataset with 52K examples of prompts and responses, then fine-tuned Llama-7B using those prompt and response pairs.

The result was surprisingly good — Alpaca was able to interact with users similarly to OpenAI's InstructGPT models, despite being inexpensive to train and not using a human-created training dataset. In this blog post, we'll write code to train our own model from scratch using the Alpaca dataset.

_The code in this blog post is based on that in the [Alpaca repo](https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca), though my hope is that it should be simpler and more intuitive. All credit should go to the original authors of the paper._

## Setup

You'll need to install `torch`, `transformers`, `datasets`, and `accelerate`. `wandb` is great if you want to track training loss over time. And, of course, you'll need some good GPUs if you want your model to train quickly.

Start out by creating one main folder, `alpaca-repro`, with two subfolders: one called `trainer`, where your training code will go, and one called `finetunes`, where we'll save your fine-tuned model.

## Step 1: Loading and Processing the Data

Put all of the code in this section into `trainer/get_data.py`.

We'll begin by loading the [Alpaca data](https://huggingface.co/datasets/tatsu-lab/alpaca) from the Hugging Face hub. Each question/prompt pair in the dataset needs to be converted into a single string that we can train the model on, but we actually generate one extra string: `source`, which we use further down to ignore labels so our model doesn't train on instructions.

```python
from datasets import load_dataset

original_dataset = load_dataset("tatsu-lab/alpaca")["train"]

template_no_context = """Below is an instruction that describes a task. \
Write a response that appropriately completes the request.

### Instruction:
{instruction}

### Response:
"""

template_context = """Below is an instruction that describes a task. \
Write a response that appropriately completes the request.

### Instruction:
{instruction}

### Input:
{input}

### Response:
"""

def data_to_string(data):

    instruction = data["instruction"]
    context = data["input"]
    response = data["output"]

    template = template_context if len(context) > 0 else template_no_context
    source = template.format(instruction=instruction, input=context)

    return {
        "source": source,
        "text": source + response,
    }


dataset = original_dataset.map(
    data_to_string
).remove_columns(['instruction', 'input', 'output'])
```

Here we split the data so we can use 10% for evaluation and tests later on.

```python
processed_dataset = dataset.train_test_split(test_size=0.1)

train_dataset = processed_dataset["train"]
eval_dataset = processed_dataset["test"]
```

Finally, we define a data collator to be used by our training loop. Remember that each `text` string is just made up of the `source` plus the response. So we tokenize the `source` string to figure out how many labels in the `text` string to ignore.

```python
IGNORE_TOKEN = -100

def data_collator(features, tokenizer):
    sources = [feature["source"] for feature in features]
    targets = [feature["text"] for feature in features]

    source_tokens = tokenizer(
        sources,
        return_tensors="pt",
        padding='longest',
        max_length=None,
    )

    target_tokens = tokenizer(
        targets,
        return_tensors="pt",
        padding='longest',
        max_length=None,
    )

    labels = target_tokens["input_ids"].clone()

    for i in range(len(labels)):
        source_len = source_tokens["attention_mask"][i].sum()

        labels[i, :source_len] = IGNORE_TOKEN

    res = {
        "input_ids": target_tokens["input_ids"],
        "attention_mask": target_tokens["attention_mask"],
        "labels": labels,
    }

    return res
```

## Step 2: Writing our Training Loop

Put all of the code in this section into `trainer/loop.py`.

This code is fairly self-explanatory, so I've just annotated it with comments.

```python
from transformers import LlamaForCausalLM, LlamaTokenizer, Trainer, TrainingArguments
from accelerate import Accelerator
from get_data import train_dataset, eval_dataset, data_collator

accelerator = Accelerator()

MODEL_PATH = "meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-hf" # path to Llama on Hugging Face Hub
OUTPUT_DIR = "../finetunes/alpaca-7b" # where to save the fine-tuned model

tokenizer = LlamaTokenizer.from_pretrained(MODEL_PATH, legacy=False)
tokenizer.pad_token = tokenizer.eos_token
tokenizer.padding_side = "right" # not set by default, strangely

model = LlamaForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    MODEL_PATH, device_map="auto"
)

training_args = TrainingArguments(
    output_dir='checkpoints', # where Trainer will save model checkpoints
    num_train_epochs=1, # start with a low number of epochs for testing
    learning_rate=2e-5,
    logging_steps=10,
    per_device_train_batch_size=8,
    remove_unused_columns=False,
    save_steps=1000,
    save_total_limit=1,
    report_to="wandb",
)

trainer = Trainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    train_dataset=train_dataset,
    eval_dataset=eval_dataset,
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
    data_collator=lambda x: data_collator(x, tokenizer),
)

trainer.train()
trainer.evaluate()

model.save_pretrained(OUTPUT_DIR)
tokenizer.save_pretrained(OUTPUT_DIR)
```

## Step 3: Running our Training Loop

Create `trainer/accelerate_config.yaml`, and paste in the following configuration:

```yaml
compute_environment: LOCAL_MACHINE
deepspeed_config: {}
distributed_type: "NO"
downcast_bf16: "no"
machine_rank: 0
main_process_ip: null
main_process_port: null
main_training_function: main
mixed_precision: "no"
num_machines: 1
num_processes: 1
use_cpu: false
```

Then `cd` into `./trainer` and run:

```bash
accelerate launch --config_file accelerate_config.yaml loop.py
```

Saving the model and weights might take a while, so be patient!

## Step 4: Testing our Fine-Tuned Model!

I wrote a simple script to load up our fine-tuned model and interact with it! It doesn't support conversations with context, but it's a great way to see how the model is working.

Create a new file called `alpaca-repro/model_test.py`, then run `python3 model_test.py`.

```python
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM, pipeline

template = """Below is an instruction that describes a task. \
Write a response that appropriately completes the request.

### Instruction:
{instruction}

### Response:
"""

model_path = "./finetunes/alpaca-7b"

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_path, legacy=False)
tokenizer.pad_token = tokenizer.eos_token
tokenizer.padding_side = "right"

model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    model_path, device_map="auto", local_files_only=True
)

pipe = pipeline(
    "text-generation",
    model=model,
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
    return_full_text=False,
    do_sample=True,
    temperature=0.9,
    max_new_tokens=200,
)

def prompt_model():
    prompt = input("Enter your question: ")
    prompt = template.format(instruction=prompt)
    answer = pipe(prompt)
    print(answer[0]["generated_text"])

while True:
    prompt_model()
```

## Conclusion

I hope this article was helpful and informative! My plan is to follow it up in a few days with an explanation of how to use FSDP with the Hugging Face Trainer.

If you got mixed up along the way, here's a Gist with the final project code: https://gist.github.com/nebrelbug/1da2c0064d53decf197a304267799708

_If you liked this article, don't forget to share it and follow me at [@nebrelbug](https://twitter.com/nebrelbug) on Twitter._
